Chris Woodfill speaking.
And I would like to introduce you to Doug Roland.
And he's a filmmaker
for the project we're going to be working on
called "Feeling Through."
>>Back in August of 2011
I was coming home late one night.
I was out in the East Village in New York City.
And I saw this man
standing on a street corner by himself.
And as I got closer
I saw that he was holding a sign
that said he needed help crossing the street
and that he was deaf and blind.
This is the first time
I had ever encountered a DeafBlind person.
So initially I tried to talk to him.
And quickly realized that wasn't going to work.
But when I tapped him, he had a notepad.
He wrote to me that he needed a certain bus stop.
So I walked him over to the bus stop.
I didn't want him to sit and wait by himself.
So I wanted to find a way
to let him know that I'd wait with him.
And I kind of intuitively just took his hand
and started writing one letter at a time on his palm.
The man who had written his name as A-R-T-Z, Artz
is how I knew him in that conversation.
He was just a really charasmatic,
open-hearted, warm person.
I was inspired to write a short film about it.
I reached out to the Helen Keller National Center
but they're pretty busy over there.
>>I was a bit skeptical about it.
Because I had never received any call
like that in the past.
>>I remember initially
I was like, I'm not so sure about this.
>>I was politely persistent in reaching out
a number of times through emails and calls.
>>I believe it was a lengthy voice message from Doug
that I learned about the idea of the film.
>>There are not DeafBlind actors
portraying DeafBlind characters in the media.
That's the whole reason we're standing here today.
And why we've come up here.
And why we've been connecting
with everyone in the community.
Because we really want to tell this story accurately.
And authentically.
>>I remember sitting in the lobby of this hotel
and meeting with Doug and the team.
So I was able to talk to Doug in detail
about what inspired the story.
>>Right from the start
I knew I that I wanted to cast a DeafBlind actor.
>>It's not common that we're going to see
the face of these people in media.
It's a sort of breakthrough. It's a first.
>>It's never happened before.
I can't think of anybody who is DeafBlind
who has ever been cast in any type of movie.
>>It was very obvious to myself
and two of my colleagues.
And we were very excited.
>>Doug told us his story about meeting this guy
seven years ago in New York.
And I said, I bet we can find him.
>>Within three hours
I got an email from Cathy Kirscher
who was a part of that initial meeting
telling me that we found him.
>>It became pretty clear who it was.
>>Debbie Fiderer goes
Hispanic guy, New York, tactile sign - it's Artie.
>>At least we know who it is.
It's this man named Artemio.
We would love to reunite with Artemio
who's inspired this story.
>>And then it became a quest.
Where is Artemio living at this time?
>>The sad part is we couldn't find Artie after that.
He has no contact with email and all of that.
But that's how small and tight this community is.
>>For months and months and months
they couldn't find Artemio.
>>People basically were saying
I don't think we're going to be able to find him.
>>I knew that there was so much for me to learn
about the community.
But also that I was going to really need help
finding potential actors to fill this role.
>>I remember starting to think in my mind
of who could be potential candidates
for Doug to interview.
>>You can come sit here.
>>So how would I encounter this person?
Would it be just walking on the street?
>>That's initially how the other character meets him.
So I'd love to just jump right in
and get to know you a little bit more.
We'd be using two cameras
to capture the scenes
in a more nuanced and efficient way.
>>Trying to figure out their communication style
and their communcation method
so that I can interpret what's going on
was challenging at times.
>>Interpreting and translation are very different.
An interpretation
is always going to be an interpretation.
It's going to be me trying my best
to get where you're at.
It's not a direct translation.
>>There might be one word in English
that I might have eight different ways to sign it
based on all of the other words around it
and what your intent is.
So my goal
is to interpret the meaning and the essence
in the manner in which you convey it
so that the deaf or DeafBlind person
will understand it
and be able to respond accordingly.
>>At one point in the middle of the day
we had a little bit of a break between auditions.
>>You know, we have options that are not on the list.
I don't know if this is good enough for you.
But if you like, do you want to meet with Robert?
He works in our kitchen.
We can pull him over here.
>>Yeah, I'd love to.
>>I think he might be a good candidate.
>>I know you just got pulled in here.
So I'll explain a little bit why we're here.
We are making a movie.
>>Wait, who's going to be the actor?
You?
Oh, I know.
I'm just joking. I'm just joking.
It made me feel so excited.
I was like, wait, are you serious?
I'm auditioning for something?
You have to remember.
I work ten to six, Monday to Friday.
>>Don't worry about that.
We would excuse you from work.
>>Are you sure?
>>Yes, it's only for a few days.
>>If I become a movie star
I don't want to be in trouble with you.
And if I'm late, it's on you.
>>Don't worry about it. We will excuse you.
>>But now I felt like this is my dream coming true.
That I'm sitting here in this room
auditioning for a movie.
I'm getting so excited about this.
I love being on camera.
>>I'm glad to hear that.
Genuinely, the moment Robert walked in the room
I was like, this is our guy.
So we were really, really excited
to call up Robert shortly after
and let him know that he'd gotten the role.
And he was very excited.
>>I just remember one day I was at work
and my boss, Dan, came over to me.
He's like, I'm on the phone right now.
And he's like
Doug picked you.
And I was like, oh my god.
Oh my god, me?
Really? Wow! I just couldn't believe it.
I was thinking, I did it. I made it.
>>I felt great for him.
I was really excited.
It was great to learn
that he was the person selected.
>>He's such a friendly, charismatic type of person.
He's got a good soul.
>>I was born deaf.
But I had 20/20 vision.
I thought about wanting to become an actor.
And meeting actors.
And wanting even to be an actor in a movie.
Then at the age of about 30, 31
I started to lose my vision.
And it became just so depressing to me.
I thought there was no way
that anyone would want to hire someone
who was not only deaf
but deaf and blind, to become an actor.
I have no peripheral vision at all.
I have like a tiny box of vision
in front of me that I can see through.
>>So his vision on a great day.
>>It would be this on top of this.
>>Yeah.
>>I mean, Artie is a completely DeafBlind person
whereas I am not.
I'm deaf and legally blind.
So it was a little bit different for me.
We're the same but we're not.
So for me, I was trying to figure out
how to play the part of Artie
because he had no vision.
I mean, who knows.
In the future I might lose all my vision.
Just like Artie.
>>I don't know what it's going to be like
getting you guys together.
And actually working through it together.
>>Do you have any tips to give me
when I first meet him?
>>I have a plan
but also I have no idea.
We'll have to figure it out.
We'll just see what it's like
when we get moving.
They have pretty unique elevators here.
There's obviously a lot more buttons in here
than most elevators.
And you can keep your hand on the button
so that when it gets to the floor
this will pop out
and it lets you know that you're at your floor.
I want him to meet Steven.
>>Nice to meet you too.
>>This is just an opportunity
for us to be able to get on our feet.
For you and Steven to interact with each other.
And for us to start to see where we're at with things.
>>You just gotta go this way, man.
Just, keep walking.
That rehearsal that we did was
different from any other rehearsal
that I've done before.
>>I remember, he came over to me.
He tapped me.
And he was trying to communicate with me, Tereek.
And it was the first time.
And he was like trying to guide me.
But here I am, I'm this DeafBlind person
and we were trying to engage with one another.
>>It took a lot of just trusting each other.
Listening to each other.
>>Even if it's a little awkward for you to do it
even if you wish you didn't have
as many things in your hands.
That's one of the obstacles
that you still need to get past
in order to communicate to him.
And that first rehearsal was great
to have Robert and Steven jump right into it.
But it was also really scary as a director
because I was like, oh man
I wish we had 20 more rehearsals
because there's so much more
we need to get through.
>>Sorry.
>>I should have protected you.
>>If I just leave you here
you're not going to be able
to get where you're going.
>>I have an idea.
>>Yeah.
So, why don't you be Robert
and let Tereek be Tereek
and let him watch you?
>>Perfect. I love that idea.
>>People, I think, are probably more familiar
with what is called "TASL."
Which is "tactile american sign language."
Which is really just using
regular visual sign language
adapted to the hand.
>>Haptics is a way of touch communication
that we use here at Helen Keller.
We might have just put our hand
on Robert's shoulder
for example to just mean "hold."
Or just to stop.
>>There are also some people
who might learn the print-on-palm method.
Where you actually take letters
use your index finger and print them
on the other person's palm of their hand.
>>It was hard for me
to actually use that type of communication
because I'm not use to it.
So it took me a while to understand
what Tereek was trying to communicate to me
on the palm of my hand.
>>I definitely came away from that first rehearsal
pretty nervous.
I was pretty sweaty by the time we got out of there.
And looking around at other people
going, "is it hot in here or is it just me?"
I know Dan is going to get mad at me
if I don't get you back to the cafeteria.
>>Ah, dammit.
>>It was really great
to be able to work with the two of them.
Moreover it reaffirmed we had cast the right people.
>>So if you want to cross the street
say you can see or hear
this will get you recognized faster.
And then when he's walking
He just needs to move his cane.
That's all he needs to do.
>>You know, basically we're going to be outside
with some natural light from streetlights
but also most of the light
that he's going to feel on him
is light that we're introducing.
>>I actually have a lot of concerns with
what he's going to be able to see from us at night.
>>It was in March of 2018
that we had that first meeting with HKNC
but it wasn't until November of that year
that I got an email
the day before we start shooting the film
that we found Artemio.
Or, we know where he lives.
>>One of our former staff members
had the opportunity to be at a forum
and at that forum was Artemio.
>>So now it's the day before we start shooting
and we have this address for Artemio.
And I was like, invite him to set.
Let's have him come.
What better way to let him know what he's inspired
than have him come down to set.
>>Scene 9, take 2, mark.
>>I remember the first time
I was standing there on the set
they had to do my makeup
and I was like, oh
is that what movie stars do?
Okay, I'm going to sit in this seat
and get my makeup done.
I'm damn handsome.
And Doug took me over to a storefront.
>>Action.
>>We were shooting this film in November
in New York City, outside, at night.
So you have the obvious challenges
that you might assume
of it being quite cold a bunch of the days.
>>I had to follow what Doug was telling me to do.
And it was cold.
And I had to focus on keeping my eyes focused.
And not act as if I was looking.
And it was tough with the weather.
>>You don't need to scan so much.
But, really, yeah.
>>I'm scanning because I don't know where he is.
So that was the scan, you know.
>>Right, sure. Of course.
>>I think it helped to just provide Robert with
a lot of the touch techniques.
So giving him signals to indicate keep going
or to indicate the scene was going to cut or to stop
I think really helped out in this situation.
>>He was sticking it out.
I thought Robert was about to tap out.
But he was like, naw.
He said, no, I got this.
I just needed a quick breather.
And he just got right back up.
And was like, yeah, we're going to finish this.
We're going to do this.
When he did that, that just tightened me up.
And I was like, I can get through this too.
Oh, sorry, man.
>>It doesn't matter if I'm deaf and legally blind.
I still felt like I could do it.
>>We were shooting almost the whole film
outside at night
and in those settings
Robert really has little to no vision.
So something we needed to figure out ahead of time
how do we break off and create little settings
where the interpreter's well lit enough
so that him and Robert can communicate.
>>So whoever was not actually interpreting
at the moment would hold the light
over Robert's shoulder
so that the light wouldn't distract him.
So it was coming from behind Robert
so he wouldn't get an ambient glare.
And he could actually see the interpreter.
>>What is that?
>>It's called a silent call pager.
It's a very simple system.
It's just one-way.
It either chimes or it vibrates.
So when they're striking the lights
Robert will wear that.
>>This is your part.
So I'm just helping you find it.
But it's your role to have.
Take more ownership over it.
>>Okay.
>>There was a scene where he touches me
and I kind of shift because of my reflexes.
And he was saying that in real life
it's a sad thought that people in this world
are afraid of human connection.
>>The point is just communicating.
It doesn't matter how you communicate.
Whether it's through sign language
or with pen and paper.
>>There was a kinship that was building between us.
I believe that it showed on camera.
There was something just magical
happening around everyone on set.
>>Cut.
That's a wrap.
>>Whoo!
>>Shhh!
>>I had to let that out. Sorry.
>>So the shoot comes and goes
and we're not able to get in touch with Artemio.
A couple days after Christmas of 2018
I was up at HKNC.
And I was like
I'm going to just go by his house
and see what happens.
We are in front of Artemio's house.
About to knock on his door.
To our knowledge
he does not know anything about this yet.
So we're going to go in there
and do our best to explain why we're there
so that we can finally be reunited with Artemio.
And let him know that he's inspired this film.
It might have been better
to do this during the daytime.
Just realizing that.
But it's dinner time.
It's, like, an approachable hour.
>>Hurdle number one.
>>Definitely don't want to hop the fence.
That would not be a good start to this operation.
By any chance you've ever seen anyone...
if they have a son that's deaf and blind?
>>I think they do have, yeah they do.
>>Okay, they do?
>>They always lock their gate
so usually you have to yell out.
>>Hello!
Hello!
I have a question.
>>Hello.
>>Is Artemio your son?
>>Artemio?   - Yeah.
>>Si.
>>Okay.
So we're friends of the Helen Keller National Center.
>>One moment.   - Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>Come on.   - Okay.
>>He's coming.   - Oh, great.
>>Sorry, I am hungry.
>>No, please.
Please.
>>My husband.
>>What did Artemio say
when you explained
who we are and why we're here?
[Spanish translation]
>>[in Spanish]
I told him a seven year old friend
is here and wants to see him.
He remembers. You remember?
>>Very quickly we realized
that the most effecient way for us to communicate
was just like how we communicated
when we first met each other.
>>Are you an artist?
Yes. Filmmaker.
>>Do you want a fresh water?
Sure.
It had been at this point
about seven and a half years exactly
since the one and only time
that I had met him prior.
But the instant he walked down the stairs
his appearance and his energy
it was very familiar.
Surprisingly so.
Over the course of this year
in searching for him
I started building this rounded understanding
of who Artemio was
through all these other encounters that he'd had
with other people.
I will tell you
more about the film
soon.
It was great to be able to finally fill him in
on this whole experience that he's inspired.
But it was really just, more than anything
really great to see him again.
It was such a pleasure
to meet you again.
So great
to see you again.
>>Doug had never even met a DeafBlind person
in his entire life.
Meeting me was his first time
encountering a DeafBlind individual.
And we ultimately became friends.
Now I'm motivated
to learn about becoming an actor.
And becoming an author.
Similar to Helen Keller.
>>Robert being a part of this experience
wasn't a challenge.
It made it what it is.
It was such an integral part
of creating the environment
that pervaded every moment of the shoot.
It's in the DNA of every moment
of the story that we're telling.
>>It gives other individuals who are DeafBlind
an example of what's possible.
>>It was a learning and humbling experience.
All around.
>>I can do anything.
Just like your typical sighted-person can do.
>>It doesn't really matter who the people are.
It's about that connection
that two people can make.
>>I hope to educate people through the film.
So that's my hope for the future.
And I hope that Doug, maybe, who knows
he'll give me a shot at doing part two of this movie.
>>The whole journey from the start
of meeting Artemio years ago
to aligning with Helen Keller National Center
to casting Robert as our DeafBlind actor in the film
has been such an amazing journey.
And it was just so great to have it capped off
by reuniting with Artie.
And getting a chance to share that with him.
>>To really elevate people's awareness
about people who are DeafBlind is tremendous.
>>I feel like at the end
when we embrace each other and have the hug
I feel like it was showing
how people can help each other out.
And I felt like that was something
that really left an impact on me.
Because we are all not alone in this world.
Everybody needs each other.
Everybody needs help.
And everybody can help each other out.